As is often the case in this course, this code challenge follows directly from the previous video and
code demo.
So in the previous video I calculated RSA and category selectivity for two attention matrices in one
layer.
Now that you have this set of knowledge and skills and code, you are going to extend this analysis
to a larger model and to all of the layers.
It will be pretty interesting to see whether and how these analysis results change as we traverse deeper
into the model.
Actually, most of the hard work for you to do in this code challenge is in exercise two.
Exercise one is just about setting everything up.
You can copy from the notebook file from the previous video, or it might be easier just to make a copy
of the entire notebook file, rename it and start to modify it.
There are a few changes that you need to make here for exercise one.
So in the previous video I used GPT two medium.
Here you are going to work with GPT two large.
And you also want to hook all three attention matrices, not just the two that I did in the previous
video.
Now there's only one batch of tokens to run, and the sequences are not so long.
So you can actually run this whole code challenge on the CPU.
The end result of this exercise will be a set of the activations from the query, the keys, and the
values vectors.
You can print out all of the dictionary keys to confirm.
Make sure that you have everything from all the transformer blocks and the three attention matrices,
and the shape of any one of those should match.
this size.
So 34 sentences, five tokens per sentence and 1280 embeddings dimensions from each of these matrices.
Okay, so now you should pause the video and work through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code, although just briefly just to give an overview of what I changed relative
to the previous video.
Typical libraries here is let me see.
Import GPT two large.
And here's the hooks.
This is almost identical to the code from the previous video, except here I'm also storing the V matrices.
So the values matrices and then the surgery for the implantation here is in a for loop over all of the
layers.
So I can run that code.
This code I did not change from the previous video, although I just copied and pasted things around
a little bit.
So it's fewer, uh, pieces of code overall.
And then finally we run all of the data through the model and just confirm that we get all the keys
that we expect.
So all of the, uh, matrices, the tensors that we expect and that the activations tensors are the
size that we expect.
This exercise is where you will run all of the analyses, although you don't do any visualizations until
exercise three.
So this for loop here shows an overview of what you should do.
So you loop over all of the layers in the model.
And then within each layer you calculate the cosine similarities for q and k and v vectors independently
of each other.
And you can confirm that each of these matrices should be 34 by 34, corresponding to the 34 For sentences.
And of course, we really only care about the final token in each of these sentences because the first
four tokens are identical, and the fifth token is that unique token that comes from the three categories.
So from each of these cosine similarity matrices, you can then calculate selectivity in the indices
and store them in a three by three matrix.
The 36 corresponds to the 36 transformer layers in GPT two large, and the three corresponds to the
three matrices so q, k, and v.
Then you can calculate and store the RSA and store those values in a different matrix, but of the same
size as the selectivity indices.
So this means you're going to have an RSA score for each layer in the model and for each of the three
attention matrices.
So now you can pause the video and code up this analysis.
As I mentioned multiple times before, you can make this exercise easier or more challenging depending
on how much code you want to copy from the previous video.
Anyway, now I will switch to code.
There's not a whole lot for me to discuss in this exercise solution.
It's basically just the code that I showed in the previous exercise, the previous video.
Sorry, separately for Q and K that's that you've seen in previous video and also now for V.
But of course the code is exactly the same, just working off of a different activations tensor.
Here I calculate the selectivity indices also exactly the same.
And then here I am storing them into this matrix selectivity indices.
And then for the RSA.
Yeah.
Also very straightforward here.
Finally the visualization.
You can create two scatter plots that both have the transformer layer on the x axis.
And here you show the selectivity index.
And here you show the RSA.
And of course you want to look for any patterns across the different matrices.
And as a function of depth in the model I hope you find this visualization to be insightful and interesting.
And now I will switch to code.
The code here is also quite straightforward.
I have three separate lines of plotting for each row in these matrices.
And you can actually plot this all in a little for loop if you prefer.
But yeah, I have it in separate lines just to separate the visual appearance of them.
Okay.
So this is quite interesting.
We can interpret the RSA first.
First of all, all of the values are quite strong.
So really high.
Generally all above 0.84 ish and going all the way up to 0.96.
Now you don't really see a lot of consistency in terms of increases or decreases with transformer layers,
or real noticeable differences between the different pairs of matrices.
So this tells us that the way that the embeddings vectors for the different tokens in the different
categories are related to each other within each matrix is pretty consistent.
Uh, within the each individual layer and across all of the layers and across the different matrices.
So nice to see.
But, uh, yeah, we can't really make a lot of interesting interpretations out of this.
It's just that the RSA scores are generally pretty high.
And then we get over here.
Now we do see some striking differences.
So the selectivity indices in general are high in the beginning when we are closer to the input, closer
to the text, as it appeared when it first entered the model into the embeddings.
So that means that early in the language model, the processing is closer to the semantic category.
And later on, as we get deeper into the model, the category of the semantic category of the different
tokens matters less and less.
So basically this tells us that by this point, the model doesn't really care so much about the specific
semantic category of the word, and that's probably because the preceding context doesn't actually include
any of the category specific information about space or furniture or fruit.
So, uh, now this result here, the difference between Q and K, this tiny little difference here,
close to one.
That is what we focused on in the previous video.
That was a different model.
That was GPT two medium this GPT two large.
But you see the same pattern here.
And on the other hand you see in the values matrix we get in general much stronger selectivity.
And it has this interesting smile pattern where the selectivity is higher but decreasing.
But then actually around the middle of the model it starts to increase again.
So more category selectivity.
As we get deeper into the model, you will continue to see throughout the rest of this course that we
can use the same or very similar analyses on different parts of the model to reveal different dynamics
in the model.
And you will also see that we can do different analyses on the same data to look for different patterns
and reveal different features.